The Carboniferous Period lasted from about 359.2 to 299 million years ago* during the late Paleozoic Era. 
The term "Carboniferous" comes from England, in reference to the rich deposits of coal that occur there. 
These deposits of coal occur throughout northern Europe, Asia, and midwestern and eastern North America. 
The term "Carboniferous" is used throughout the world to describe this period, although in the United States 
it has been separated into the Mississippian (early Carboniferous) and the Pennsylvanian (late Carboniferous) Subsystems. 
This division was established to distinguish the coal-bearing layers of the Pennsylvanian from the mostly 
limestone Mississippian, and is a result of differing stratigraphy on the different continents. 
The Mississippian and Pennsylvanian, in turn, are subdivided into a number of internationally recognized 
stages based on evolutionary successions of fossil groups . These stages are (from early to late) Tournaisian, 
Visean, and Serpukhovian for the Mississippian — and Bashkirian, Moscovian, Kasimovian, and Gzhelian for the Pennsylvanian.

In addition to having the ideal conditions for the formation of coal, several major biological, geological, 
and climatic events occurred during this time. Biologically, we see one of the greatest evolutionary innovations 
of the Carboniferous: the amniote egg, which allowed for the further exploitation of the land by certain tetrapods. 
It gave the ancestors of birds, mammals, and reptiles the ability to lay their eggs on land without fear of desiccation. 
Geologically, the Late Carboniferous collision of Laurasia (present-day Europe, Asia, and North America) into Gondwana 
(present-day Africa, South America, Antarctica, Australia, and India) produced the Appalachian Mountain belt of 
eastern North America and the Hercynian Mountains in the United Kingdom. A further collision of Siberia and eastern 
Europe created the Ural Mountains of Russia. And climatically, there was a trend towards mild temperatures during the 
Carboniferous, as evidenced by the decrease in lycopods and large insects, and an increase in the number of tree ferns.

The stratigraphy of the Mississippian can be easily distinguished from that of the Pennsylvanian. The Mississippian 
environment of North America was heavily marine, with seas covering parts of the continent. As a result, most Mississippian 
rocks are limestone, which are composed of the remains of crinoids, lime-encrusted green algae, or calcium carbonate shaped by waves. 
The North American Pennsylvanian environment was alternately terrestrial and marine, with the transgression and regression of 
the seas caused by glaciation. These environmental conditions, with the vast amount of plant material provided by the extensive 
coal forests, allowed for the formation of coal. Plant material did not decay when the seas covered them, and pressure and 
heat eventually built up over millions of years to transform the plant material to coal.